you're doing at the moment I've got to
be in mocking cage here with a number on
her back
lovely and I'm just gonna put a radar
transponder onto her back so that we can
track her fantastic this might look like
a radio-controlled V but it's actually a
bee with a little radar transponder on
it which means that we can track this
bee as it flies around the field clever
stuff when a radar beam hits this
transponder it bounces back a return
signal that can be detected by receiver
dish less than 10% of the bees body
weight is simple and harmless to put on
and take off and these little guys from
carrying 90% of their body weight in
pollen so it won't affect the way it
flies
and now all we need is some radar and in
the Land Rover in the middle of the
field
player traffic control the radar beam
sweeps out across the meadow and Beyond
and as the bee flies the transponder
bounces back its signal to the receiving
dish
it is spotted on a screen for the first
time ever we can see exactly where the
bees go which direction how fast how
high how far even pinpoint what their
favorite food is
and once Abby's done its work we can
watch it fly back home again
coming back laden with pollen and as the
transport of themselves on the radar
this is what Juliet discovered first of
all the bees are flying much faster than
predicted an incredible 30 miles an hour
even when fully laden the next surprise
is where the bees go they almost always
over fly potentially decent food like
this oil seed rape in favor of more
distant booty Juliette thinks this is
probably to avoid competition with other
members of the same hive the further out
you go the more choice you get and once
they've found that batch they then
repeatedly shuttled to and from it and
this is the really clever bit in spite
of 30 mile an hour crosswinds weather
outs all back they all fly in dead
straight lines B lines for an animal of
a few grams with the brain the size of a
grain of salt this is no mean feat but
it's vitally important because like the
geese they're on a knife-edge energy
budget the straight of their bee lines
the less energy they expend